---
date_created: '2025-02-23'
date_lastchanged: '2025-02-23'
layout: default
show_date_lastchanged_updatedauto: YES, NO, NO
title: Materialist Outline Overview of Human Societal Development
---
# Materialist Outline Overview of Human Societal Development  

*All below is an excerpt [1]. *

Having some understanding of dialectical and historical materialism, we can now look at human history and see how and why, in a very general way, the large scale changes have occurred. The world has seen four main societal-productive systems so far and some countries are beginning the fifth level. These stages were primary communalism, slave society, feudalism, capitalism  and now we are moving towards socialism. We will briefly and very generally cover these stages and spot some of the main factors that led the development from one stage to the next higher one. We will point out the key struggles or contradictions, that through their resolution led to human advancement.  

## Primary Communalism

First we see primary communalism, where people used stone, wood, bone and crude hand-made tools. There was no developed agriculture because people did not have the tools or know-how at the time. Frequently, they had no need to develop them as nature fulfilled their  2  needs. The people lived together in small wandering groups, spending almost all of their time on just surviving. They shared their wealth communally. They didn’t do this because they were any smarter or loved each other any more than at any later age; they did it because working together, hunting and gathering plant food together was the only way they could survive. Labor worked in common led to the common ownership of the means of production, such as it was, and to the sharing of the fruits of the work. The idea of private ownership of the means of production, except perhaps for personal ownership of certain weapons, did not yet exist. Tribes grew up over the years and they shared their common goods. While there may have been occasional fighting between different tribes, basically the people lived and shared equally among themselves. There was no exploitation, classes or class struggle.

Primary communalism was by far, the longest-lasting system that existed everywhere on Earth. When human beings first emerged on this planet, we lived and survived in communal families, clans and tribes, sharing and working together for thousands and tens of thousands of years.

## Slave Society

Next we see the slave owning system. It must be noted though, that the whole world did not develop all at once. Some areas moved along while others remained put because of the particular conditions and situations in each area. We can still see parts of the world today where feudal type (peasant and landowner) relations exist, but most of the world is capitalist with some areas having other types of relations.

As primary communal groups learned how to better use their environments, some became less nomadic. This helped bring about the beginning of agriculture (the deliberate cultivation of crops and domestic animals). This also led to more permanent settlements, since it was less necessary to follow and hunt wild animals. This in turn led to the development of new technology. People began to use metals – copper, bronze and later iron – to make better tools and weapons (the means of production took a qualitative leap forward). More settled lives also allowed the accumulation of more material possessions than could be readily carried by nomads.  

With the development of better tools/weapons, more could be produced and the communal societies began to develop a surplus of goods, that is, not everyone has to work full time for the group to survive. This surplus could either be divided equally among all or it could go to a few who then didn’t have to work. At first, the communal system remained, but then some people developed better weapons and knowledge of agriculture. The surplus that these advances provided was kept by individuals and we begin to see the concept of private property develop. Since certain people developed these new tools, weapons, and methods (especially of farming) before others, they saw that more could be farmed and produced if more people could be put to work. Their superior weapons enabled them to conquer other peoples, enslave them, and bring them back to their lands to work. So the slave system came into existence.

We see that an advancement in the means of production enabled private property to develop, which led to the emergence of classes – the slave owners and the slaves. Thus, class society was born. While it was a brutal system and most people suffered, the world as a whole reached a higher material level in the sense that more was produced. As a result, the struggle for a better standard of living became more a social struggle than one of constant struggle for survival and nature. The slave owning period is marked by intense class struggle and warfare between the slaves and the slave owners.

## Feudalism
The next stage is the feudal system. Here a small landowning elite, usually called the nobility or aristocracy, as well as church officials derived most of the benefits of the society. This feudal ruling class had enormous power over the people. The vast majority of people were peasant farmers or serfs, who were legally tied to the land they worked (they could not leave the land without permission of the nobles who owned the land). The serfs, however, had some rights. For example, while they still could be bought and sold as part of the land, they could not be killed arbitrarily. They also owned their own tools and animals, and were allowed to keep a portion of the crops they grew on the landlord’s land. The aristocracy needed the labor of the serfs to extract the wealth from the land and maintain the infrastructure on which the nobles’ power was based, and so had to grant these concessions to the peasants.  

This system developed through further improvement of the means to production. Iron and steel were produced and high grade weapons and tools like swords and plows and other farm implements were made. This meant that more could be farmed faster and better. A slave, however, gets the same amount of food and rest and remains a slave whether he works fast or slow and therefore has no incentive to produce more, even with better tools. But if a person can see some gain in his/her work, like the possibility of keeping part of the product, he or she will work more. This gave landowners incentive to discard the slave as a less productive laborer in favor of the serf, who had his or her own tools, animals, and a greater interest in his or her work. Landowners also did not have a big investment in serfs that would be lost if the serf died or ran away. These factors, as well as more and more slave revolts and the breakdown of the old slave-owning empires, led the system to change – led to the development of feudalism.  

With feudalism’s new methods and tools, people were able to produce ever more things beyond food and to do that better and faster. Handicrafts and later, artisan manufacture (not to be confused with industrial production which did not develop until capitalism), grew and developed. Towns and cities arose to accommodate this new type and level of commerce. Some serfs ran away from the nobles to learn various trade skills in outlying districts, which expanded development more. Some nobles set certain peasants up in castle shops to produce the various goods needed by the nobles’ estates. Craft guilds arose and kept and expanded the knowledge and techniques of various handicrafts; children were apprenticed to craftsmen so they could learn trades. Specialization emerged. Along with this development was the growth of towns and cities as centers of manufacturing and trade. Urban centers grew up where the raw materials were gathered, the products were made and sold, and where transportation was good (crossroads, river forks, seaports). As a result, a wider system of commercialism, sometimes called mercantilism, grew.

As the variety and availability of products grew and their prices declined, demand for them by people in different areas increased. Middlemen arose to bring buyers and sellers together. These were the traders, merchants and bankers who filled the needs of economic growth and development in ways a primarily land-based nobility could not. Society began to see people who were not members of the noble class but whose families had, over many years, accumulated more money than many nobles. (The rich non-nobles were often called burghers in Europe, and from this word we get bourgeois or capitalist.) Yet the noble class, along with religious authorities, remained in control of the government, which, though increasingly national, was still mostly local.  

These were the seeds of the new system, capitalism. It was developing while the feudal system was still strong. The strength of the feudal system is what sharpened the contradiction between the then ruling class of land-owning nobles and the new mercantile class, the peasant class, and the emerging body of workers not employed as farmers. The rise of new tools and procedures of manufacture, agriculture and commerce also raised new contradictions an struggles grew as the needs of the nobility and the inefficiency of the feudal system inhibited progress. This system was also marked by the subjugation of the majority of the people by the minority noble class. The basis of the nobles’ class power was that they owned the land, which was the major means of production for the majority of people. This gave them material power, when the wealth derived from the land dwarfed all other sources of wealth.  

Feudalism was marked by two main types of struggle: first, the class warfare of the serfs against the nobility and, later, the conflict between the growing capitalist forces of bankers, merchants, traders, and manufacturers against the ruling nobility class also. The serfs struggled because they wanted freedoms and their own land, and the bankers, etc., because they based their power on money, trade and production, not on land-owning and agriculture. The feudal system with its constant wars, irrational property relations and other costs of maintaining an aristocracy impeded the change that would allow the societies to grow and develop through new forms of economic and social activity. In this situation, the nobility was one aspect of the contradiction; peasants, workers and the bourgeoisie was the other aspect.

## Capitalism  
This leads us to the fourth stage, capitalism and its most recent and usual political system, capitalist democracy. We must bear in mind, though, that when they need to protect their political and economic power, the capitalists think nothing about changing from capitalist democracy to out-and-out fascist dictatorship. Nazi Germany was an example of this, as were the CIA and capitalist overthrows of the popular democratic governments of Iran, Guatemala, and Indonesia and their replacements with repressive dictatorships. Moreover, the degree of democracy within capitalist countries varies. Israel, for example, allows virtually no democracy for, and acts as a dictatorship towards, the Palestinians under its control. Saudi Arabia has a puppet legislature and disenfranchises women, no one votes for the King, etc. While democracy is the label that capitalists use for their system, this does not mean all people have real equal rights or opportunities.

It actually means democracy for the capitalists and “obey” the rules for the working class. In fact capitalist democracy only allows a small amount of political democracy: the right to pick between a few candidates selected by the ruling class. ==Social and economic democracy are conveniently omitted from the capitalist definition. People don’t get to vote at all on the things that are currently most important to them such as job issues or property relations.==

As we saw, many merchants and traders had become rich in the later part of the feudal era. But since they were not born to the “right” parents, they were a force without any real political power. These early capitalists controlled the towns and cities, but only so many people could be employed as craftsmen and shippers, etc. The cities stayed small and the real political power remained in the hands of the landowning nobility. Then came the industrial revolution, the invention of the steam engine and the invention of large-scale machinery. In other words, a large qualitative leap occurred in the means of production.  

The invention of machinery ended the handicraftsmen method of production and brought in the rise of factories and the corresponding mass movement of the people from the countryside to the cities to work these new mills. [...]  

The new struggles and contradictions that came with the ending of feudalism and the rise of capitalism led to significant social changes for the common people too. Under feudalism the peasants had certain rights, but they were still legally tied to the land. The new capitalist ruling class had no need to own the people or to make them live on their land because they were not primarily land owners, they were factory and business owners. The feudal noble class had a certain responsibility to the peasant. In the case of a very bad harvest, the landowners would have to open their storehouses ( just a little of course) to keep the serfs alive so they could produce for the nobles again the next year. 

The capitalists, however, only needed the workers to labor in the mill. If business was bad (as it always is every several years in the cycles of capitalism), they would not want any responsibility to feed and clothe the workers. ==The capitalist class did not need or want a peasant class. They needed a working class, a group of workers not tied to the land, who lived in the shadow of the mill and who were so-called “free” to sell their labor power to the capitalists, whenever the capitalists needed it.== The rest of the time the workers were “free” to starve. As we know, the working class became a reality and soon grew into the largest class in industrialized countries. [...]

The qualitative advance in the means of production not only led to political change – the government power was taken from the landowning nobility class by the capitalist class – but also great social change. The new productive forces required that the workers be better educated and more skilled than the peasants had been, so they could understand and operate the machinery in the factories. This meant that some education was begun for working people. Also,  in order to just have enough workers available to labor in the mills, cities grew up around the factories and most people became urban dwellers. Common people gained legal and political rights (though we all know that even today these rights exist a lot more on paper than in our real lives). Life today is vastly different than in the feudal era, and it is all a product of this rise of the machine age.

[...]

The capitalists developed the new means of production and brought the world the machine age. ==We must keep in mind though, that when we say the capitalists developed industrial production, we mean they were the force pushing the ideas and setting up the plants. It was the working class who actually sweated and worked to build the factories and who then worked in the plants and produced the goods.== Just as the feudal nobility class and its subordinate craftsman class became useless with the development of machinery, so, too, ,the world is now at the stage where the capitalists are worse than useless, they are a drag on further social progress. Today all production is done socially (many people work together to produce the commodities), yet the instruments of production are owned privately and therefore, the products become the private property of the factory owners. This is often expressed as the contradiction between social production and private appropriation. Put in blunt terms, laborers work and produce everything, while the owners do little to nothing, but get to keep most of the benefits of our work. On top of this, they turn around and try to convince us that they are doing us a favor by giving us a job by letting us work our lives away to make them rich! Plus they get to make the decisions about what is produced, meaning much of our productive capacity is wasted on military madness to defend bourgeois power and produce luxury goods no on but a minority elite can afford, instead of affordable housing, food, education, healthcare, transportation – social goods for all.

## Decolonizing eurocentric marxist historical theories 

Read here about [critiques of Marxisms](MARXISM-CRITIQUE-A.md) that contexualize this historical overview further. 

---

#marxism #economy #materialism #historical-overview

---

### Source

[1] - Laaman, J. (2008). _Dialectical and Historical Materialism_. [https://4strugglemag.org/2008/05/10/a-basic-introduction-to-dialectical-and-historical-materialism-by-jaan-laaman/](https://4strugglemag.org/2008/05/10/a-basic-introduction-to-dialectical-and-historical-materialism-by-jaan-laaman/)